initial specs (#2)
rollkit/celestia-da: specs/src/celestia-da.md

|  Fee        |  Fee for submit blob transaction           |  fee
|  Gas        |  Gas for the submit blob transaction       |  gas_limit

## Assumptions

There should be a remote celestia node, either full, bridge or light node running and accessible from the client.

The client trusts the remote celestia node to connect to the celestia network and send, receive and validate messages.

To be able to submit blobs, the following assumptions are made:

    * The remote celestia node is fully caught up with the network to.
    * The auth token has atleast read/write permissions.
    * The remote celestia node has a account with a non zero balance to pay fee.

## Implementation

The implementation calls the corresponding [Celestia Node RPC API](https://docs.celestia.org/api/v0.11.0-rc13) methods.

### Get

Get retrieves blobs referred to by their ids.

The implementation calls [blob.Get](https://docs.celestia.org/api/v0.11.0-rc13/#blob.Get) RPC method on the Celestia Node API.

### Commit

Commit returns the commitment to blobs.

The implementation calls `blob.CreateCommitments` which does not call any RPC method, so it's completely offline.

### Submit

> Submit submits blobs and returns their ids and proofs.

Reviewer: Could you talk about how you can use options? We might want to use that in the interface.

The Celestia implementation is a wrapper around [celestia-openrpc](https://github.com/rollkit/celestia-openrpc) which
connects to a local celestia node using an OpenRPC client.

A new client can be created by passing in the OpenRPC configuration. These include the following parameters:

| Parameter   | Description                                | JSON field  |
|-------------|--------------------------------------------|-------------|
| Auth Token  | Authentication Token for node connection   | auth_token  |
| Base URL    | URL for node connection                    | base_url    |
| Timeout     | Timeout for node connection                | timeout     |
| Fee         | Fee for submit blob transaction            | fee         |
| Gas         | Gas for the submit blob transaction        | gas_limit   |

## Assumptions

There should be a local celestia node, either full, bridge or light node running and accessible from the implementation.

The implementation uses the celestia node to interact with the celestia network to send, receive and validate blobs.

To be able to submit blobs, the following assumptions are made:

> * The local celestia node is fully caught up with the network to.

Reviewer 2: network tip?

Author: Fixed.

* The auth token has at least read/write permissions.
* The local celestia node has a account with a non zero balance to pay fee.

## Implementation

The implementation calls the corresponding [Celestia Node RPC API](https://docs.celestia.org/api/v0.11.0-rc13) methods.

### Get

Get retrieves blobs referred to by their ids.

The implementation calls [blob.Get](https://docs.celestia.org/api/v0.11.0-rc13/#blob.Get) RPC method on the Celestia Node API.

### Commit

Commit returns the commitment to blobs.

The implementation calls `blob.CreateCommitments` which does not call any RPC method, so it's completely offline.

### Submit

Submit submits blobs and returns their ids and proofs.

The implementation calls [blob.Submit](https://docs.celestia.org/api/v0.11.0-rc13/#blob.Submit) RPC method with `DefaultSubmitOptions` on the Celestia Node API.

`DefaultSubmitOptions` uses default values for `Fee` and `GasLimit`.

> TODO: Allow `SubmitOptions` to be passed in to the Submit method.

Author: OK, this is related to go-da, so I'll create an issue there.

### Validate

Validate validates blob ids and proofs and returns whether they are included.

The implementation calls [blob.Included](https://docs.celestia.org/api/v0.11.0-rc13/#blob.Included) RPC method on the Celestia Node API.

## References
[1] https://github.com/rollkit/go-da

[2] https://github.com/rollkit/celestia-openrpc

> [3] https://docs.celestia.org/api/v0.11.0-rc13/

Reviewer 2: You can further refactor the links like this
```suggestion
[3] [node api docs]

[node api docs]: https://docs.celestia.org/api/v0.11.0-rc13/
```

then you can use that same link in the rest of the readme so you only have the update the API url once when the version bumps.

Reviewer 2: same can be applied to the go-da and celestia-openrpc links

Author: Thanks, updated.

# Celestia DA

## Abstract

This package implements the generic DA interface defined in [go-da] for Celestia.

## Details

The generic DA interface defines how DA implementations can submit, retrieve and validate blobs.

> The Celestia implementation is a wrapper around [celestia-openrpc] which

Reviewer: Does not wrap celestia openrpc so this has to be adapted

Author: Done.

connects to a local celestia node using an OpenRPC client.

A new client can be created by passing in the OpenRPC configuration. These include the following parameters:

| Parameter   | Description                                | JSON field  |
|-------------|--------------------------------------------|-------------|
| Auth Token  | Authentication Token for node connection   | auth_token  |
| Base URL    | URL for node connection                    | base_url    |
| Timeout     | Timeout for node connection                | timeout     |
| Fee         | Fee for submit blob transaction            | fee         |
| Gas         | Gas for the submit blob transaction        | gas_limit   |

## Assumptions

There should be a local celestia node, either full, bridge or light node running and accessible from the implementation.

The implementation uses the celestia node to interact with the celestia network to send, receive and validate blobs.

To be able to submit blobs, the following assumptions are made:

* The local celestia node is fully caught up with the network tip.
* The auth token has at least read/write permissions.

> * The local celestia node has a account with a non zero balance to pay fee.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The local celestia node has an account with a non-zero balance to pay fees if it wants to send blobs or transactions. You don`t need a balance for requests 
```

Author: OK. Removed 'You' for consistency.
